Networks Fundamentals

   Two ways of being identified a device on a network:
   - IP Address
   - A media Access Control (MAC) Address

   IP Address:

      Octet 1     Octet 2     Octet 3  Octet 4
      192.        168.        1.       1
      0-255       0-255       0-255    0-255

      IP Addres can change from device to device but cannot be active simultaneously more than once within the same network.
      IP Address follow a set of standards known as protocols. These protocols are the backbone of networking and force many devices to communicate in the same language. However, we should recall that devices can be on both a private and public network. Depending on where they are will determine what type of IP address they have: a public or private IP address.
      Here we have two devices on a private network:

      Device Name       IP Address        IP Address Type
      DESKTOP-KJE57FD	192.168.1.77	   Private
      DESKTOP-KJE57FD	86.157.52.21	   Public
      CMNatic-PC	      192.168.1.74	   Private
      CMNatic-PC	      86.157.52.21      Public

      DESKTOP-KJE57FD - MAC: EC:5C:68:C3:7E:51
      CMNatic-PC:     - MAC: 50:3E:AA:E8:3B:64

      These two devices will be able to use their private IP addresses to communicate with each other. However, any data sent to the Internet from either of these devices will be identified by the same public IP address. Public IP addresses are given by your Internet Service Provider (or ISP) at a monthly fee (your bill!).

      Cisco, an industry giant in the world of networking, estimated that there would be approximately 50 billion devices connected on the Internet by the end of 2021. (Cisco., 2021). Enter IP address versions. So far, we have only discussed one version of the Internet Protocol addressing scheme known as IPv4, which uses a numbering system of 2^32 IP addresses (4.29 billion) -- so you can see why there is such a shortage!

      IPv6 is a new iteration of the Internet Protocol addressing scheme to help tackle this issue. Although it is seemingly more daunting, it boasts a few benefits:

      Supports up to 2^128 of IP addresses (340 trillion-plus), resolving the issues faced with IPv4
      More efficient due to new methodologies

      IPv6 example: 2a00:22c4:a531:c500:425f:cce6:c36b:f64d
      IPv4 example: 86.157.52.21

   MAC Address:

      Devices on a network will all have a physical network interface, which is a microchip board found on the device's motherboard. This network interface is assigned a unique address at the factory it was built at, called a MAC (Media Access Control) address. The MAC address is a twelve-character hexadecimal number (a base sixteen numbering system used in computing to represent numbers) split into two's and separated by a colon. These colons are considered separators. For example, a4:c3:f0:85:ac:2d. The first six characters represent the company that made the network interface, and the last six is a unique number.
      However, an interesting thing with MAC addresses is that they can be faked or "spoofed" in a process known as spoofing. This spoofing occurs when a networked device pretends to identify as another using its MAC address. When this occurs, it can often break poorly implemented security designs that assume that devices talking on a network are trustworthy. Take the following scenario: A firewall is configured to allow any communication going to and from the MAC address of the administrator. If a device were to pretend or "spoof" this MAC address, the firewall would now think that it is receiving communication from the administrator when it isn't.

   Ping
      Ping uses ICMP (Internet Control Message Protocol) packets to determine the performance of a connection between devices, for example, if the connection exists or is reliable.
      The time taken for ICMP packets travelling between devices is measured by ping, such as in the screenshot below. This measuring is done using ICMP's echo packet and then ICMP's echo reply from the target device.

   Introdcing Local Area Network (LAN) Topologies
      Star Topology
         The main of a star a topology is that are individually connected via a central networking device such as switch or hub. Is very commonly because of its reability and scability - despite the cost.
         Any information sent to device in this topology is sent via the central device.
         Its more expansive, but is much more scalable in nature, which means it is very easy to add more devices.But, the more maintenance the network scales, the more is required to keep the network functional.
         If the centralised hardware that connects devices fails, these devices will no longer be able to send or receive data.

      Bus Topology
         This topology relies upon a single connection which is known as backbone cable, similar to the leaf of a tree. Because all data destined for each device travels  along the same cable, it is very quickly to becoming slow and bottlenecked if devices within topology are simultaneously requesting data. Is hard to identify the device with problem. Have a single point of failure (backbone cable).

      Ring Topology
         Devices such computers are connected directy each other to form a loop, wih less cables and dependence on dedicated hardware syck within a star topology.If the device happens to have data to sendm it will send its own data first before sending data from another device.
         The fail of a cable will result the entire networking breaking.

   A primer on subnetting
      Subnetting is a term given to splitting up a network into smaller, miniature networks within itself.
      Forms  to use a subnet:
      - identify the network address:
         This address identifies the start of the actual network and is used to identify a network's existence.
         For example, a device with the IP address of 192.168.1.100 will be on the network identified by 192.168.1.0.

      - identify the host address
         An IP address here is used to identify a device on the subnet.
         For example, a device will have the network address of 192.168.1.1.
      - identify the default gateway
         The default gateway address is a special address assigned to a device on the network that is capable of sending information to another network.
         Any data that needs to go to a device that isn't on the same network (i.e. isn't on 192.168.1.0) will be sent to this device. These devices can use any host address but usually use either the first or last host address in a network (.1 or .254).

   Address Resolution Protocol - ARP
      Technology that is responsible for allowing devices to identify themselves on a network.
      Simply, ARP allows a device to associate its MAC address with an IP address on the network. Each device on a network will keep a log of the MAC addresses associated with other devices.
      Devices can use ARP to find the MAC address (and therefore the physical identifier) of a device for communication.
      Each device within a network has a ledger to store information on, which is called a cache. In the context of ARP, this cache stores the identifiers of other devices on the network.
      In order to map these two identifiers together (IP address and MAC address), ARP sends two types of messages:

      ARP Request, ARP Reply

      When an ARP request is sent, a message is broadcasted on the network to other devices asking, "What is the mac address that owns this IP address?" When the other devices receive that message, they will only respond if they own that IP address and will send an ARP reply with its MAC address. The requesting device can now remember this mapping and store it in its ARP cache for future use.

   Dynamic Host Configuration Protocol - DHCP
      A IP address can be assigned either manually or automatically and most commonly by using a DHCP server. If a device not already been manually IP, it sends out a request to see if any DHCP server are on network. A communication is established and a IP is generated for device. Look:
      DHCP discover: is there anyone who can give me an IP Addres?
      DHCP Offer: sure, you can have 192.168.1.10
      DHCP Request: thank you! I'll start using.
      DHCP Ack: Ok, can use that IP for the next 24 hours.

   Open Systems Interconnection Model - OSI Model
      This model provides a framework ditactating how all devices will send, receive and interpret data.
      Layers:
      1. Physical:
         Components of the hardware. Devices use eletrical signals to transfer signals data between each other in binary. 
         E.g: ethernet cables.

      2. Data link:
         Focuses on the physical addressing of the transmition, receive a packet the network layer (including the IP address) and adds in the physical MAC address. Inside every network-enabled computer is a Network Interface Card (NIC) which comes with a unique MAC address to identify it. Additionally, it’s also the job of the data link layer to present the data in a format suitable for transmission.

      3. Network: 
         Rounting and re-assembly of data takes place (from these small chunks to the larger chunk). Routing determines the most path fot data should be sent. These protocols include OSPF (Open Shortest Path First) and RIP (Rounting Information Protocol). What route is better?
         What path is the shortest? I.e. has the least amount of devices that the packet needs to travel across.
         What path is the most reliable? I.e. have packets been lost on that path before?
         Which path has the faster physical connection? I.e. is one path using a copper connection (slower) or a fibre (considerably faster)?


      
      4. Transport
         When data is sent between devices, it follows one of two different protocols that are decided based upon several factors:

            Transmisson Control Protocol - TCP
               This protocol reserves a constant connection between the two devices for the amount of time it takes for the data to be sent and received.
            Advantages:
               - Guarantees the accuracy of data.
               - Capable of synchronising two devices to prevent each other from being flooded with data.
               - Performs a lot more processes for reliability.
            
            Disadvantages:
               - Requires a reliable connection between the two devices. If one small chunk of data is not received, then the entire chunk of data cannot be used.
               - A slow connection can bottleneck another device as the connection will be reserved on the receiving computer the whole time.
               - A slow connection can bottleneck another device as the connection will be reserved on the receiving computer the whole time.
            
            User Datagram Protocol - UDP
               This protocol is not nearly as advanced as its brother - the TCP protocol. It doesn't boast the many features offered by TCP, such as error checking and reliability. In fact, any data that gets sent via UDP is sent to the computer whether it gets there or not. There is no synchronisation between the two devices or guarantee; just hope for the best, and fingers crossed.

               Advantages:
                  - UDP is much faster than TCP.
                  - UDP leaves the application layer (user software) to decide if there is any control over how quickly packets are sent.
                  - UDP does not reserve a continuous connection on a device as TCP does.

               Disadvantages:
                  - UDP doesn't care if the data is received.
                  - It is quite flexible to software developers in this sense.
                  - This means that unstable connections result in a terrible experience for the user.
      
      5. Session
         Once data has been correctly translated or formatted from the presentation layer (layer 6), the session layer (layer 5) will begin to create and maintain the connection to other computer for which the data is destined. When a connection is established, a session is created. Whilst this connection is active, so is the session.

         The session layer is also responsible for closing the connection if it hasn't been used in a while or if it is lost. Additionally, a session can contain "checkpoints," where if the data is lost, only the newest pieces of data are required to be sent, saving bandwidth. 

         What is worthy of noting is that sessions are unique — meaning that data cannot travel over different sessions, but in fact, only across each session instead.

      6. Presentation
         This layer acts as a translator for data to and from the application layer (layer 7). The receiving computer will also understand data sent to a computer in one format destined for in another format. For example, when you send an email, the other user may have another email client to you, but the contents of the email will still need to display the same.
      
      7. Application
         The application layer of the OSI model is the layer that you will be most familiar with. This familiarity is because the application layer is the layer in which protocols and rules are in place to determine how the user should interact with data sent or received.